week eleven notes - Archeron1148

podcast

    final week woohoo
    neat song and neat essay to go with it
    Katherine Cook:
        -recomends sara perry

Nothing Beside Remains
https://cutgarnetgames.itch.io/nothing-beside-remains

  Nothing Beside Remains is a very neat little game. Begining the game, I initially bumped into the fallen statue and recognized it as a reference to Ozymandias. But unlike that poem, which paints the image of the remains of a statue standing out alone in a vast dune of sand, this statue exists amoungst the ruins of a seemingly once very lived town. Beside where the statue once stood is what appears to be a temple, seemingly a place of directed, communal worship with ceramic jugs on a stone altar in the north end of the building and pews all along to the southern entrance. Connected behind the altar is a small room with marked ceramic and broken metal remains alongside wooden tables and chairs. It would seem this room was used for liturgical preperation if not for the number of chairs and the fact that the same objects there are found within the crumbling remains of other buildings found across the dusty stone pathways of the town. Perhaps this suggests that the temple also doubled as the living space for the local priest. What's most remarkable is the wetness still retained in the soil around this deserted town; If not for lack of adequate farmland, why did the original inhabitants leave? Take a peek into any old house and the answer will be clear as day: in nearly every one we see chairs which have claw or teeth marks on the legs, or with entire legs having been removed. I think the most rational explaination for 'why did they leave?' is that they were driven out after being terrorized by some yet unknown wild creature with a hunger for chair legs!
  
  [worth reading in full](https://intarch.ac.uk/journal/issue55/2/full-text.html)
  
  I can't say for sure what literary tropes are present here but my assumption that the pews and the altar indicate 'a place of directed, communal worship' is certainly based on the cultural trope of Christian churches. I think that Indiana Jones and Nothing Beside Remains both reinforce a very pervasive stereotype of archaeological work - that is most commonly takes place in the sandy desert ruins of a lost civilization - which I think we ought to try to move people away from here in Canada because this view of archaeology excludes the sort of work archaeologists do with First Nations' communities: I think many get the idea that because there were no castles or statues or pyramids or booby-trapped tombs in Canada before the arrival of settles, theres not much archaeological work to do here.

The Enchantment of the Archaeological Record
https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/Perry2019_Enchantment_AcceptedMS.pdf

    Empirical studies increasingly testify to the capacity for archaeologicaland cultural heritage sites to engender wonder, transformation, attachment,and communitybonding among diverse individuals.Following political theorist Jane Bennett, these sites have the power to ‘enchant’and, in so doing, they are seedbeds ofhuman generosity, ethical mindfulness, and care for the world at large. However, the means by which such enchantment is created, and the extent to which these intimateencounters with the prehistoric or historic record can be deliberately crafted, are little understood. Worsening the predicament,professional practices commonlythwart the potential  for  archaeology  to provokeethical action  amongsthumans. Here,  I proposea  multi-stranded  conceptual  model  for  generating  enchantment  with  the archaeological record across both professional audiences and broader publics.
    Yet, as practitioners, we are singularly positioned to access and ignite sparks of enchantment, suggesting that we have a professional responsibility and moral obligation to systematically investigate their dimensions and analyse their consequences
    Bennett’svision of enchantment offers a particularly meaningful framework for disciplinary investment owing to its agonistic approach and its appreciation of the purposeful nature of enchantment, wherein deliberate design (by archaeologists working intentionally to foster affect) may encourage genuine social action.
    Archaeology has inherent in it sources of enchantment—what Hearne(after Shanks,2012)calls the ‘archaeological imagination’(see Hearne,in press,for a fuller account of this phenomenon). We are literally atop untold histories: things, ideas, lives,and activities that we have never seen before, that we may know nothing of, and that can thus endlessly surprise and transform us. 
    The methods we use as professionals to craft the archaeological record and the typical accounts we write about the past tend to revolve around crisis, driven by the sector’s normative ‘preservation paradigm’ and ‘conservation ethos’ (Högberg et al., 2017). 
    Not only does the evidence suggest that such discourse is unappealing to wider audiences (see Contention 3 below), but it also blinds us as archaeologists and heritage practitioners from conceiving of new futures and different interpretations (after Högberg et al., 2017), weakens our resilience in the face of genuine adversity and inevitable change (Holtorf, 2018), and arguably makes meaningless the very notion of heritage value because of its ubiquitous and unnuanced application (Rico, 2015). 
    In fact, archives themselves are premised on the notion that we can forever discover new and different things about their contents—hence the preservation of these contents, ripened for reinterpretation over time. 
    A threats-based discourse strips wonder from the archaeological record, promotinga belief in the inalienable authenticity of the stuff to be ‘rescued’, which—as with anything that fetishizes authenticity (here I follow the arguments of Shorin, 2018a & b)—variously begets irony, false consciousness, nihilism,or essentialism. These narratives rarely offer alternatives.
    Feeling refers to qualia and the subjective phenomenological experience, while emotion refers to the processing and packaging of affect in familiar cultural categories such as anger, grief, schadenfreude, etc.’ But, of specific interest to me is their assertion that ‘emotion is action-oriented; it pushes people to do things’(Wetherell et al.,2018: 1).Elsewhere,Wetherell (2012: 4) calls emotion‘embodied meaning-making.’ As I interpret this, emotion is enacted in the body, and it propels the body forward to act in some fashion, whether that act is visible or invisible, physical or conceptual.
    The evidence that archaeology and heritage are,and have always been,inescapably bound into socio-politico-economic power structures and human rights is incontrovertible (e.g. McGuire, 2008; Hardy, 2017). If nothing else, we should feel encouraged that practitioners and representative professional bodies now increasingly recognize such power dynamics as a given, thus prompting them to articulate strategic visions and objectives which explicitly define their socio-political aims, such as Hearne’s (in press) radical archaeology, or Hutchings and La Salle’s (2014) tenets for anti-colonial archaeology teaching. 
    ***Gonzáles-Ruibal et al. (2018: 507), in a vexed argument about current public archaeology, profess that the overtideological models recently adopted by archaeologists ‘have promoted an agenda during the last decades that has left us politically and theoretically disempowered.’ By their logic, naïve efforts at inclusion and, by extension, affect have fostered populism, in the sense that everyone has a voice and a right to exercise that voice regardless of the coherence or veracity of the statements being made and their potential impacts on others. What results from such circumstances isa kind of ‘progressive neoliberalism’, ultimately leading to the opposite of social justice and ‘emancipatory politics’ (Gonzáles-Ruibal et al.,2018: 509).***
    To me, however, such findings do notoffer a reason to deride existing practice or reject whole models of thinking (as Gonzáles-Ruibal and colleaguespropose), but rather to continue consolidating, progressively refining,and systematically evaluating our efforts3.
    People generally want to explore ‘complex, controversial topics’ in museum contexts (Carnall et al., 2013: 66); and major research endeavours across multiple continents demonstrate that people do not expect cultural institutions to be neutral but rather to ‘have a social responsibility to take a leading role in inspiring people’s social and political activism in order to help bring about change’ (Lynch, 2017: 24). 
    In sum, while some evidence suggests that heritage most powerfully affirms people’s existing personal, social and political values, even in circumstances where a heritage site has been curated to challenge these values (Smith, 2014; Bartram, 2017), research also indicates that there is space (mostly still unexplored) to hone ‘the enchantment effects of archaeology and heritage... to motivate a move from ethical thinking to ethical action... to make a move for better futures to come’ (Fredengren, 2016: 496; also Hearne, in press).  
    I use the term enchantment here as I understand Jane Bennett (2001: 5) to mean it—'a state of wonder’ that typically entails surprise, pleasure, uncanniness (discomfiture), presence, or sensory agitation. In Bennett’s conceptualisation, this affective state leads to action in or on the world, which allows me to liken it to the definition of emotion outlined above. Moreover, in line with the emotive research previously discussed, enchantment according to Bennett (2001: 4, 10) can be ‘fostered through deliberate strategies’ and is experienced by all, rather than being a luxury of the few. By Bennett’s (2001: 3) reckoning, we can ‘accentuate’ the world’s affective forces therein encouraging ‘ethical generosity.’  
    ***Bennett offers various reflections on the generation of enchantment: it can be encountered by surprise or be deliberately generated (including through technological intervention) by play, art, laughter, attentiveness to specificities, as well as by resisting the idea that there is no such thing as enchantment. It is ‘an uneasy combination of artifice and spontaneity’ (Bennett, 2001: 10). It does not privilege happiness or positive affect, and it does not depend on divine intervention or fate or the necessity of a designed universe, because to do so enables ‘complacency in the face of cruelty and violence’ (Bennett, 2001: 10 after Voltaire).***
    Fredengren’s approach seemingly relies on a spiritual or ‘otherworldly’ rationale, wherein archaeology is enrolled in part to ‘provide religious experiences in a post-secular way’ (Fredengren, 2016: 493). Such religious motivations sit in tension with Bennett’s more agnostic version of enchantment, and they arguably perpetuate a predicament that has long afflicted archaeology, where divine yearning is embraced by people to make sense of the world and its ‘mysteries’(see Borck &Thompson,2018 for more on the dangerous consequences of appealing to mystery and otherworldliness as part of archaeological practice). Fredengren herself (2016: 483; emphasis in original) suggests that enchantment effects can ‘create the possibility of seeing other ways of being in the world’, but as I reckon, these need not be predicated upon spiritualism.  
    The archaeological sector begs for a model of practice that escapes conventional discourses in order to constructivelyimpactonthe present and future. As Fredheim (2018: 623)suggests, ‘Alternative heritage practices should...not only be about forgetting or curating decay, but also include creative renewal and addressing toxic pasts that will not be neutered by silence.’ 
    ***The focus on cultivating empathy and/or happiness that drives many cultural heritage institutions today is, following Lynch (see comparable critique by Fredheim, 2018), arguably grounded in this charity mode. Here resistance and challenge are washed away by misguided efforts—often feel-good stories or the opposite:agonising narratives of human suffering and crisis—that can lead to superficial understanding, passivity, and a false sense of activism. Such work therebyunderminesboth democracy and individual and collective agency, the very outcomes that the institutions purport to strive for.***
    ***Of importance, digital media play a tricky role in this sabotaging of outcomes, as they are often enrolled in wonderment programmes that seek to nurture the most stereotyped of affective impacts. This is perhaps no more obvious than with virtual reality (VR), the so-called ‘ultimate empathy machine,’ which is regularly professed to allow a first-hand experience of others’ lives merely via donning a head-mounted device. Loh (2017) offers a rich critique of the fallacy at play here,wherein we confuse the simple act of putting ourselves inside the representational frame with genuine understanding of others’ experiences. ‘True empathy’ requires work;it is ‘the labor of comprehension: mind-work, not gut-work alone’(Loh, 2017).***
    With such complexity in mind, I contend that it  is  direct human-to -human communication that has the most potential for transforming opinions, rewriting crisis narratives, and breaking down barriers between the past, present, and future. Dialogue-led  methods in archaeology and heritage are rare, even though the evidence is clear that they can effectively prompt self-reflection and perspective-taking, leading to constructive alliance-building and democratic engagement with others(see review in Gargett, 2018,including work byDeufel,2017, and the US National Park Service and International Coalition of Sites of Conscience). 
    To genuinely enchant the worldmay be difficult, especially among professional communities who are saddled with approachesthat regularly breed disempowerment and underestimationof the renewability and resilienceof the archaeological record.

Virtual Archaeology and Digital Storytelling:  A Report from Rosewood, Florida 
http://www.diaspora.illinois.edu/news0910/news0910-1.pdf

    The term “virtual archaeology” entered the archaeological vernacular twenty years ago, referring to the use of 3D models to represent archaeological contexts (Reilly 1990).  Common usage during the 1990s centered on visualizing sites and producing static two-dimensional images for publication and short videos.  Since the development of Web 2.0 and the ability to deliver interactive content, the creation of virtual world environments allowing for group interaction is defining the widening field of virtual archaeology.  
    One of Gonzalez-Ruibal’s main themes examines possible alternatives to narration in terms of presenting the past.  Briefly, he argues that narration and storytelling remain the dominant forms of dissemination among academics in regards to their research, and calls on archaeology to explore alternative forms of dissemination.
    I position my work with the Virtual Rosewood Research Project (http://www.virtualrosewood.com) at the confluence of these trends, particularly as they might apply to the archaeology of the African Diaspora.  In order to do this, I explore a variety of methods to both create and deliver virtual content.  This is a conscious strategy designed to maximize access to the data and results for other researchers and the broader public.  As an engaged project (Gonzalez-Tennant, in press), this approach balances the requests of descendants with the demands of academic consistency.
    As a way to communicate this tragic history, and the lessons it holds for modern America, the Virtual Rosewood Research Project is exploring a variety of methods for analyzing, reconstructing, and disseminating information about this historic community.
    The general production pipeline for producing a 3DS Max Design version of Rosewood begins with modeling individual structures.  Since only one confirmed structure from before the 1923 race riot exists in Rosewood, other structures being modeled are based on similar structures from the area dating to the same period.  The size and type of structures modeled for Virtual Rosewood are based on information from the property documents, census records, and accounts passed down between survivors and descendants. 
    The first virtual model of Rosewood was created using SketchUp.  The inexpensive cost and low learning curve of this program allows users to quickly produce models and publish them online via 3D Warehouse.  Also, if coupled with GIS data (a relatively easy conversion process) these models can be placed into accurate geographic contexts via the free geoweb browser Google Earth (see below). 
    12 Two options are open to users of Second Life for building 3D models, and are determined by one’s willingness to purchase additional rights.  There are areas of Second Life, called ‘sandboxes’ where anyone can build anything.  However, items placed in these areas are eventually deleted once a user logs out of Second Life.  Two additional steps are required in order to build structures and objects that exist regardless of a user’s online status.  First, accounts must be upgraded to premium status resulting in a monthly, quarterly, or annual fee.  Then, the user must also purchase virtual property resulting in an additional monthly fee.  Once a user is both a premium member and virtual property owner, they can build freely on their land.
    This group’s primary motivation is to create a park and physically reconstruct the site of Rosewood as a tourist destination.  As the only voice of dissent to this plan, I am using the Virtual Rosewood Museum in Second Life to suggest an alternative.  In many ways, I disagree with the goal of turning the site into a park.  My primary concern results from the fact that the descendants have been excluded from the conversation.  Another reason focuses on potential issues of representation resulting from physically rebuilding the site; both in regards to the whitewashing of history, and the harm of casting local Whites in the area as racists through geographic proximity to the park.
    The use of Second Life for virtual history remains a powerful medium, and its use as apedagogical tool is increasing.  In many ways, Second Life provides, for a fee, a complete package for the creation and delivery of virtual reconstructions of archaeological contexts.  Second Life allows a user to control many aspects of their virtual land. 
    The second documentary will use the virtual world environment created in 3DS Max Design as a filming stage.  Since the entire community of Rosewood is being reconstructed, it is possible to create an animated walk-through or tour of Rosewood as it existed prior to 1923.  In the final version of this ‘digital documentary’ narration is shared between myself and survivors and descendants, whose stories have been collected as oral histories.  The core of this documentary involves a digital tour of the site narrated by a truly multi-vocal group of researchers, residents, and descendants.  It is being tailored to junior high age students and above.   
    https://hyp.is/wE0G6jNKEeuvYR90i_yQHw/www.diaspora.illinois.edu/news0910/news0910-1.pdf
    The days of heavy backpacks and HMDs are gone, and handheld AR is becoming increasingly common.  For most AR developers today, handheld AR means deploying augmented reality applications to mobile phones.  In order for a phone to function as a handheld AR device it must meet a few basic requirements.  First, the phone needs a camera to feed video of the physical world.  Second, the device needs to be location aware, requiring an onboard GPS receiver.  Third, the device needs to know which direction it is pointed, which requires a (digital) compass and accelerometers (for tilt data).
    There are presently notable drawbacks to this exciting technology.  The central problem stems from the inability of small portable devices to accurately locate themselves on the landscape.  The GPS precision of mobile phones is a few meters.  The result when looking at the augmented landscape is a tendency of buildings to slightly move around the landscape.  This shifting quickly lessens the longer one stands still.  
    Non-technological concerns arise when creating AR versions of archaeological sites.  While the test AR project for Rosewood is complete, the realization that placing historic structures back on the landscape may assist looters has stalled my plans to go live with the Layar application.  It should be noted that it is not local residents who pose the greatest danger to the site through looting, but rather other research partners who, in their haste, have gone to the site without archaeologists and removed artifacts themselves.  
    As these technologies continue to cost less, the ability of visitors to access virtual content in the physical world will become more common.  After all, the first camera on a mobile phone appeared in 1999, imagine what our handheld communication devices will contain in another ten years.  Furthermore, the ability to combine real-world and virtual content means that new interactive programs can be designed for parks with physical reconstructions that go beyond self-guided audio tours.  
    ***“All new media objects... are composed of digital code” (Manovich 2001:27) represents the first characteristic, and while modern media such as film follow an industrial logic (large scale production studies, expensive equipment costs, scores of labors), new media provides us with a post-industrial method, one not regulated by mass standardization.  This aspect of new media means its potential as an emancipatory form is literally hardwired into its very structure.***
    This flexibility is useful for virtual archaeology, allowing us to posit alternative interpretations side by side, a practice nearly impossible to do in full-scale, physical reconstructions of structures.  This also means that we can create a variety of interfaces with the same content.  Drawing on the examples above, the same content can be delivered via traditional formats like print images and videos, through individual online worlds like Google Earth, or in settings conducive to group interaction like Second Life and UDK.
    The final characteristic of new media is cultural transcoding.  This involves the interaction between cultural ideas and new computer methods.  At present, this is dominated through analogy with traditional media, the printed page becomes a webpage, cinema becomes online video (edited and navigated based on analog concepts like fast forward), the human computer interaction of fingers on keyboard become fully immersive virtual reality.  In regards to virtual archaeology, this takes the form of interacting with AR applications, and as with the birth of any new technology, we can only begin to hypothesize about the range of potential applications.  The term “transcode” means to translate, and how researchers and collaborators chose to translate traditional archaeological knowledge into these new formats, and the reciprocal affect on our practice as archaeologists is only beginning.

No Margins, No Word Counts, No Masters! Experimenting With 'Zines for Archaeological Outreach
https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/fitzpatrick-zines.pdf

    Alternative forms of information dissemination have always been a crucial part of many radical forms of activism and organization. Arguably the most famous is the ‘zine -popularized in the punk/anarchist subculture of the 1980’s and 90’s, ‘zines were the antithesis of mainstream magazines, journals, and periodicals. They were an extension of the D.I.Y. (do-it-yourself) attitude that flourished within the subculture, reflecting a more informal and individualistic approach to the dissemination of information and ideaswithout the rigid formalities of mainstream literature. With the emergence of a new countercultural led by millennials, ‘zines have once again found popularity, taking advantage of the Internet to spread information even further than before through digital means.
    ***Unfortunately, it appears that ‘zines have yet to find a foothold in academia as they have in social justice and activist groups –this is a shame, as there is a wealth of possibilities for the application of a ‘zine format for the dissemination of information to non-specialist audiences.***
    Over the past two decades, archaeology has seen a shift towards “outside-the-box” thinking. From queer theoryto archaeogaming, the discipline has begun to embrace non-traditional approaches to the ways in which archaeologists engagewith the theory and practice of archaeology. And yet, can we say the same for our methods in archaeological outreach and communication? 
    Perhaps the best definition of the ‘zine comes from the forefather of ‘zine studies himself, Stephen Duncombe (2008: 18): “’zines are decidedly amateur”. While this may sound dismissive, Duncombe quickly clarifies that this is not the case at all; to say that ‘zines are “amateur” is to say that they are made with love, from love, and by love. ‘Zine makers are not making a profit, nor are they professionals working within a professional context –instead, they are working against the cult of professionalism and formality through the emphasis on their individuality and amateurism. 
    ***Perhaps most importantly, ‘zines can be weaponised against an increasingly neoliberal, commodified academy and help in returning focus to a relationship basedon knowledge exchange between student and teacher (Bagelman and Bagelman 2016).***
    Possibly the most recently published archaeology ‘zine comes from the relatively new sub-discipline of archaeogaming. FlorenceSmithNichollsand Sara Stewart (2018)havepublished a ‘zine that is both an introduction text into the basics of archaeogaming theory as well as space of exploration for both the author and illustrator, allowing them the freedom to elaborate and illustrate concepts of archaeogaming that intereststhem. 
    As this has been my first foray into alternative publication, the process has been very experimental; in an effort to maintain the spirit of anarchism as our central praxis, the organisation of the ‘zine has been as horizontal and non-hierarchical as possible, with contributors having an equal say in how the ‘zine will be edited, published, and distributed. The goal of this ‘zine is to be an embodiment of challenging the assumed norms of mainstream archaeology through anarchist praxis; as such, we wanted to use a format that would allow the sort of freedom and unrestrained expression necessary to push against these norms.

Narralive–Creating and experiencing mobile digital storytelling incultural heritage
https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/1-s2.0-S2212054819300074-main.pdf

    Taking from the work of (Katiforiet al. (2018)), we define storytelling in a cultural heritage site as anexperience built around a continuous, coherent narrative that leveragesthe interpretation of the available cultural heritage artefacts to developthe essential elements of storytelling: setting, characters, plot, conflict,theme, and a satisfying narrative arc (e.g., setup, tension, climax, andresolution). This experience is delivered at and meaningfully staged on acultural heritage site and may or may not directly correspond with realevents.
    The Narralive Storyboard Editor was designed and developed afteridentifying a gap in technological solutions for museum and culturalheritage sites that wish for a cost-efficient way to create and offer digitalstorytelling experiences. Arguably, there is a variety of existing tools forthe authoring of guided tours and other similar experiences for culturalheritage, or narrative experiences in other contexts.
    Our Editor was designed with a story-centric approach in mind,where the structure of the experiences is driven by the plot and not thelocations of the points of interest and exhibits. A storyboard-like look-and-feel and a hierarchical organization of the contents in story terms(chapter, scene, page) were combined with additional structural ele-ments to support branching in the narrative, boosting plot interactivityand engagement. 
    The Narralive Storyboard Editor (NSE) is a web-based authoring toolfor digital interactive narratives. Its purpose is to aid users that possessstorytelling skills but lack strong technical or creative expertise to laydown experiences in an easy and effective manner. Interactive experi-ences are not necessarily linear, but may contain decision points oroptional parts. Hence, they are mandatorily modelled as graph structures.
    The Narralive Storyboard Editor and Mobile Player have been put inpractice for different purposes in a variety of contexts and use cases,within the course of the last three years. These experiences have beenused for educational purposes, in the context of digital archaeology andmuseology, they support research in thefield of museums and archaeo-logical sites experiences, and they are in use by museums offering visits tothe public.
    Since itsfirst version in 2016, the NSE has been applied in a variety ofcontexts and used for the creation of 27 experiences in 16 museums andsites, as for example (Roussou et al., 2017), (Mirashrafi, 2017), (Katiforiet al., 2019a), (Katifori et al., 2019b) and (Economou et al., 2019).
    An interesting relevantfind to be reported is the fact that the authors,given minimal guidelines as to the type of experience to design, pushedthe boundaries of the tool with alternative uses of activity templates andunforeseen story structure approaches, resulting in a variety of experi-ence types.
    ***The Storyboard Editor was initially conceived as a story prototypingtool, to support authors without particular technical expertise to definetheir story concept and structure and put the draft scenario and script ofthe story in this structure. However, with almost no exception, in none ofthe use cases was this put to practice. All authors started to brainstormmostly on paper, then conceived the initial story structure and script in atext editor like Microsoft Word, and once there was a more or less stabledraft they then moved to the NSE to prototype and test their experience.***
    A consistentfinding amongst most of the authors was the fact that itwas not immediately clear what is the role of Chapters and Scenes andhow they impact the created mobile experience. Although Chapters andScenes are there to support the structuring of the content, they seem tocreate an overhead for the author, who does not necessarily wish tostructure the experience in this way.
    The use of the tool so far has proven its advantages for effective designand development of a variety of digital mobile experiences. The story-board paradigm by itself is not well-suited to very complex non-linearnarrative structures, but may successfully represent near-linear struc-tures (i.e., a main storyline with parallel paths (branches) that mergeback to the main one). This type of narrative is well suited in a realisticsetting where a cultural heritage site is looking to produce a cost-efficientstorytelling experience, and an expert familiar with non-linear narrativesis not part of the team.

Closely Observed Layers: Storytelling and the Heart
https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/tringham-heart.pdf

    
