week 11 reflection - Archeron1148

>Perhaps most importantly, ‘zines can be weaponised against an increasingly neoliberal, commodified academy and help in returning focus to a relationship based on knowledge exchange between student and teacher (Bagelman and Bagelman 2016). - [Fitzpatrick, No Margins, No Word Counts, No Masters! Experimenting With 'Zines for Archaeological Outreach](https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/fitzpatrick-zines.pdf)

I found it a little contradictory, or perhaps just a bit naive, how in this article Fitzpatrick first recognizes zines for their underground history in radical politics and outsider art, and then makes the call for academics to adopt this format for its emancipatory potential. But there is nothing about the format of the zine which brings about anything radical or subversive. The relationship between the two is precisely the opposite: it is because the people who were making these zines did not have access to major publishing institutions that they had to adopt a DIY format to get their ideas out. Anything especially radical or creative that came out of the cultures around zines did not come from the zines but rather the people in those communities. The common thread between all these communities which used zines (and the very reason why they adopted the format) was that they were coming from outside the establishment - does Fitzpatrick not realize that the academy is itself the ideological wing of the establishment? And does she not realize the irony in asserting that "‘zines can be weaponised against an increasingly neoliberal, commodified academy" when she is calling for the all-too-typically-neoliberal appropriation of zines into the academy?

>discuss some ways in which a creative mindset might change what archaeology (or history for that matter) could be for you as a scholar. 

I am also quite bit skeptical about the idea of using the enchantment that Perry describes in her article. My problem stems from it being a non-rationalistic (perhaps even anti-rationalistic) strategy at inducing some kind of action. In essence, my critique is similar to one argument which she presents herself:

>Gonzáles-Ruibal et al. (2018: 507), in a vexed argument about current public archaeology, profess that the overt ideological models recently adopted by archaeologists ‘have promoted an agenda during the last decades that has left us politically and theoretically disempowered.’ By their logic, naïve efforts at inclusion and, by extension, affect have fostered populism, in the sense that everyone has a voice and a right to exercise that voice regardless of the coherence or veracity of the statements being made and their potential impacts on others. What results from such circumstances is a kind of ‘progressive neoliberalism’, ultimately leading to the opposite of social justice and ‘emancipatory politics’ (Gonzáles-Ruibal et al.,2018: 509). - [Perry, The Enchantment of the Archaeological Record](https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/Perry2019_Enchantment_AcceptedMS.pdf)

I do not believe that there is anything inherantly good about a state of enchantment. Sure, it can be used in certain ways to help bring positive action into the world, but at the same time I think it can bring about totally negative action. A person who is enchanted is essentially, as I understand it, in something like a hightened emotional state which makes them want to respond in some way to what they have been presented with. If the practice as a whole is to adopt this strategy of inducing enchantment (in the simplist possible terms) I think you will see good people inducing enchantment to bring about positive action and bad people inducing enchantment to bring about negative action. Furthermore, it is not fully determinable what an enchanted person may decide to do even if the inducer has good intentions. For these reasons, I believe we ought not to accept methods of 'convincing' such as enchantment which appeal to a person in a non-rational way.

I think a creative mindset is useful for speculative/imaginative thinking as a means to solving problems in history or anywhere else. It is very important for theoretical analysis to be able to create an imagined framework to fit our observations inside. This imagined part however, must remain abstract: I am still unable to see what the use of creatively filling in the blanks of the archaeological record is for historians. I don't think that techniques like the "refleshing" described below actually help us develop a more accurate idea about life in Catalhoyuk. At worst I think they can give us a percieved but, in truth, lacking sense of empathy like the one described by Perry at the end of this page. The only place I can definitly say a more creative/imaginative approach is useful is in communicating or teaching already developed and abstracted historical theories through 'filling in the blanks,' creating hypothetical examples of things which *could* have happened according. Here I am thinking of things like historical video games such as and historical fiction, but also some documentaries of the style where we see a day in the life of a typical neolithic man, for example.

>They describe their aim in and the process of “refleshing” the remains (the  illustrations  were  created  by  John  Swogger)  as  you  see  them  in  these  charts  (Hager  and  Boz,  2012:300;  also  see  Hawkes  and  Molleson  2000):  “The  images  (reconstructions) represent the principal characters in the story of Building 3, and seeing them as people rather than as skeletons gives us a sense of who they might have been, young or old, male or female. The reconstructions help us see the people who in death, and perhaps in life, were directly linked to Building 3” (Hager and Boz 2012:300). - [Tringham, Closely Observed Layers: Storytelling and the Heart](https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/tringham-heart.pdf)

>Of importance, digital media play a tricky role in this sabotaging of outcomes, as they are often enrolled in wonderment programmes that seek to nurture the most stereotyped of affective impacts. This is perhaps no more obvious than with virtual reality (VR), the so-called ‘ultimate empathy machine,’ which is regularly professed to allow a first-hand experience of others’ lives merely via donning a head-mounted device. Loh (2017) offers a rich critique of the fallacy at play here,wherein we confuse the simple act of putting ourselves inside the representational frame with genuine understanding of others’ experiences. ‘True empathy’ requires work;it is ‘the labor of comprehension: mind-work, not gut-work alone’(Loh, 2017). - [Perry, The Enchantment of the Archaeological Record](https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/Perry2019_Enchantment_AcceptedMS.pdf)
